# Composable Kernel (CK) Builder MIOpen Integration

We are in the process of migrating instances from their current home inside CK (under `library/include/ck/library/tensor_operation_instance/gpu` and `library/src/tensor_operation_instance/gpu`) into MIOpen, converting them to use the CK Builder API. These instances are currently represented as std::tuples of specialized kernel template types. CK was built using a version of C++ before C++20 that did not have comprehensive support for structural non-type template parameters, so the kernel specializations are currently just large lists of positional template parameters. Some are numeric (i.e. number of dimensions) and some are types (i.e. tensor layout, data type).

With the builder's switch to using structural non-type template parameters, any type-based template parameters have been switched to enum values within fields of those structs. Numeric template parameters are going to remain numeric but are also moving to numeric fields on those structs. These new enums are defined in the CK Builder project in the file `experimental/builder/include/ck_tile/builder/types.hpp`. Their values are similar to the types used by CK but they may have different alphabetic casing.

Each concrete type of kernel has its own corresponding set of concepts and constraints that define the structure and values that need to be provided as non-type template parameters to the builder to get it to return the correct type of kernel, which is then instantiated at runtime. You can see documentation for MIOpen's versions of these in [CK Builder Kernel Instance Data Readme](./include/miopen/ck_builder/instance_data/README.md), and the structs themselves are [here](./include/miopen/ck_builder/instance_data/).

The bulk of the work in migrating this code to use CK Builder is to translate these tuples of specialized template types to be constexpr std::arrays of structs that are the appropriate structure and contain the appropriate values to effectively get the builder to return the same kernel type as is explicitly specified in the legacy code.

There are examples in `src/kernels/ck_builder/include/miopen/ck_builder/instance_data/xdl.hpp` and `src/kernels/ck_builder/include/miopen/ck_builder/instance_data/xdl_v3.hpp` for `DeviceGroupedConvFwdMultipleABD_Xdl_CShuffle` and `DeviceGroupedConvFwdMultipleABD_Xdl_CShuffle_V3` kernels respectively. These have `constexpr` helper functions that have a list of parameters that mirrors that of the template parameters for these kernels. The helper functions then take these parameters and put them into the correct fields in the structs that are consumed by the builder.

There are static tests present under `src/kernels/ck_builder/include/miopen/ck_builder/static_tests`. The purpose of these is to do some compile-time checking of specific instances to ensure they satisfy the builder constraints and compile. These instances won't make it into the final linked executable if they aren't also referred to by one of the factories.
